---
layout: default
---

# What this website is for

As a distance runner who is learning how to code, I naturally wanted to create some tools to better understand my training. While resources like Strava and Garmin both have useful visualizations, they are best used for examining a single activity or day and are difficult to use for examining long-term trends in specific variables over time or against other variables, so I created this space to dive into particular combinations of data that are not freely represented elsewhere.

# Data Pipeline

## Data source

I gathered all of my data from Garmin using a single export of approximately 16000 files amounting to a total of about 143 MB of data, ranging from September 5th, 2021, through April 18th, 2026, which encompasses most of my training from 10th grade through my sophomore year of collegiate athletics. Much of this data was contained in activity files, which store data collected during manually started activities, and monitoring files, which store data collected throughout the day as I wear my watch. There are currently the only files I use in this website, though I have plans to use other data such as sleep metrics and VO2 max in the future.

## Cleaning

The data was stored in .fit files, which I've never worked with before, so the first step in cleaning it was to simply understand the data structure and determine which parts I wanted to keep. After determining the structure, I turned the parts I wanted to keep into dataframes using pandas, making one for each of record, session, and monitoring data. My record dataframe had one row per second (usually--on some longer runs, my watch switched to collecting data less frequently to preserve battery) during manually started activities, with information like gps data, distance, speed, heart rate, and cadence. My session dataframe contains just one row of data per activity, with information like total distance and steps, average and maximum heart rate and cadence, start and stop timestamps, and what sport the activity is. My monitoring dataframe contains one row per minute, with information like auto-assigned activity labels, heart rate, and step and distance counts that are cumulative per day. These are just the columns I kept; there were many more that I deemed unnecessary for my interests.

## Pre-processing

The record and session dataframes were fairly easy to create once I understood the structure, but the monitoring dataframe was incredibly sparse when I first created it. For example, the time information was split between an explicit timestamp column and an implicit rolling counter, information corresponding to the same time was typically stored in multiple rows with only one or two pieces of data (or none at all), activity labels were typically set very sparsely (roughly every 15-20 minutes), and most files contained summary rows that were (for my purposes) redundant. To solve these issues, I reconstructed timestamps using both a forward and backward pass, aggregated data per timestamp (taking care to prioritze heart rates close to recent values and explicit activity labels over generic ones in the case of multiple values per timestamp), and propagated explicit activity labels within 15 minutes (or a bit longer, if the window encountered a generic label, as that is a sign of continued activity) so long as the heart rate was within a reasonable range for such an activity.

## Scaling for 16000 files

Up until this point, I had only been working with a test subset of 256 files, since I knew I would make many mistakes (I did) and working with the full dataset would take a long time (that did too). However, although I now had functioning code, it was not at all optimized to scale, so I made several improvements to the efficiency of my code, ranging from small things, like using swapping iterrows() for itertuples() and switching from lists to sets, to medium things, like avoiding multiple passes through the datasets and copying my files from Google Drive to local disk storage in Google Colab before working with the files and then copying back to Google Drive afterward, to larger things, like learning and implementing multiprocessing to speed up parsing (admittedly, I'm not sure if this worked; my function only assigned 1 CPU, and I'm not sure if that's due to Google Colab only providing a small number of CPUs or if my code didn't work quite as intended) and caching my processed dataframes in parquets for use in future runs to skip the slow work of recreating them or to export to other places like GitHub or Streamlit, as I did later in the process. Once I implemented these changes, I passed the entire data set through, made a couple of minor last-minute edits to the dataframes, and was ready for analysis.

# Analysis

## Structure and design

One of the major relationships I wanted to examine was how my heart rate behaved over time. To look at this, I wanted to group my data into seasons, which I manually encoded to start the day after the final major effort of each season (including both official and unofficial races) and end the day of the final official race of each season. I made these choices because my coaches designed my training programs so that I would peak at the final official race of the season, but if I had another major effort soon afterward, I typically maintained a decent level of training through that event, which meant that I wouldn't take my end-of-season break before starting my next training block until after I finished these unofficial events. Given that these seasons were of differing lengths by nature, I wanted the option to align different seasons by the beginning or end dates to better allow for examining trends at the beginning and end of seasons, respectively. I also wanted to have the option to plot multiple heart rate metrics, including resting heart rate per day, average heart rate while running, and maximum heart rate while running. These were relatively simple things to put into a dataframe; I just had to grab the heart rate data from the session and monitoring dataframes, aggregate by timestamp (taking care to take the weighted average for the average heart rate), and craft some metadata columns. Heart rate data is rather noisy, however, so I also wanted to add a slider to control the smoothing of the data. Finally, I wanted to color-code the different seasons chronologically to more meaningfully distinguish the different seasons across time, as well as the option to display custom subsets of seasons to look at more niche and varied relationships. To do all of this, I wrote a script for Streamlit that accesses a dataframe stored in a parquet, run it in Render, and present it below in this website via GitHub.

## Interactive Visualization

<div style="width:100%; height:150vh; overflow:hidden; border-radius:12px;">
  <iframe
    src="https://garmin-dashboard-tq4m.onrender.com"
    style="width:100%; height:100%; border:none;">
  </iframe>
</div>

## Interesting view options

Given how information-dense this plot is, I want to provide some interesting settings and tell some of the story behind them:

#### All seasons, resting heart rate, aligned to end, with smoothing of 14

This is perhaps my favorite graph of this data, and not just because of the massive spike in my resting heart rate due to me breaking my elbow on February 16, 2024. Removing Track 2024 from the list of seasons or cropping the view to exclude the upper region makes viewing the rest of the data a little easier. One of the most interesting things about this graph is how my resting heart rate has dropped over time, as depicted by the cooler-colored early seasons being higher on the y-axis than the warmer-colored more recent seasons. Also, most of my official seasons are about 8 weeks long, from first race to last race, which reveals some interesting patterns when you consider how training changes from pre-season to in-season. Pre-season running is all about easy miles, just aiming for a large volume at a low effort. In-season running has a lot of higher-effort workouts up until a couple weeks before when you intend to reach peak fitness, typically the last or biggest race of your season, at which point you start to increasingly cut back effort and volume in what's known as a taper. This pattern of training is extremely evident in the collegiate seasons (XC 2024 and onward), where my resting heart rate drops throughout the base-building phase at the beginning of the training cycle, rises around the initial introduction of workouts (typically hill repeats and threshold/tempo workouts) and races, and then drops as it adjusts to the workload of those workouts, and then rises as harder workouts (VO2 workouts) are introduced, and then finally drops just before the final race as workload is reduced. My earlier seasons tend to follow a similar pattern, just slightly earlier, and not as strictly, perhaps due to me having a lower mileage at those times and thus my training had less of an impact on my resting heart rate. Note that these are just a couple possible explanations for these trends; it is near-impossible to draw causal relationships from this data.

#### All seasons except for XC 2021, max heart rate, aligned to start, with smoothing of 30
This graph shows a slight general trend for max heart rate to be a bit higher for more recent seasons in the first half of the training cycle and a bit lower in the second half, but the most fascinating thing to me is when these plots peak. Most of them tend to drift up toward the end of the timeline, which makes sense given that even with maximal smoothing, workouts and particularly races are bound to increase the max heart rate. More interestingly, they also peak earlier in the cycle, with the more recent seasons peaking about 10 weeks in and the older seasons peaking around 12-15 weeks into the season. The first phase of any training cycle (on this scale) is building weekly mileage back up to a base level, and I know for sure that in more recent years, my mileage has first hit the max level around 10 weeks into the cycle, which aligns with the first peak for these plots, and for earlier years, I know that I took off-season training much less seriously and thus often didn't hit my max mileage until a bit later, or around the 12-15 week mark, as shown in this graph. Again, these are just a couple of explanations for the behavior displayed in the graph, as it is difficult to deduce causal relationships from this sort of data.

#### All seasons except for XC 2021, avg heart rate, aligned to end, with smoothing of 30
This graph shows a pretty similar set of trends to the prior one, with the most notable difference being that there is not as significant of an upward drift toward the end of the timeframe, most likely because the faster efforts that produced the higher max heart rate values were recorded during shorter activities, so they have less of an impact on the average across all runs that day. Also, rest periods, warmups, and cooldowns all help drag down the average heart rate on race days, which would normally produce some of the most elevated and sustained heart rates. Interestingly, my average heart rate toward the end of cycles has tended to stay higher for more recent seasons than it has for older seasons. I'm honestly not sure why this is, but my best guess is that this is a result of having harder workouts with longer work intervals and shorter rest intervals. 

## Limitations and future improvements

Wonderful though this visualization is, there are still some improvements I would like to make, including adding an option to align the graphs by date (perhaps by splicing along a commonly excluded date in late November and/or early May rather than January first to avoid splitting up the track seasons), adding the ability to plot multiple heart rate metrics against each other, adding shortcuts to display just track or just cross country seasons, using the actual resting heart rate for each day rather than just the lowest recorded heart rate as I currently do, and as a larger upgrade, adding an automatic update feature using the Garmin API. As far as future visualizations, I would love to create a heatmap using my gps data and a visualization plotting my distance (or weekly distance) over time, perhaps within each training cycle. I could even create a similar visualization to this one, with options to display distance totals or proportions in a similar manner to how I have options to display different heart rate metrics. All of these improvements will be part of a future project, however, and hopefully soon!
